LINES WRITTEN
on the
TOWN of BATLEY

Once in my life I knew a place
Some forty years ago
But it has grown so different since
One scarcely knows it now

2.
There's little left, as then it was,
Except the Church, and site
On which it stands; and tho' 'tis there
It has been altered quite

3
For at the time ( and later too)
To which I have referred,
The old bells sounded one, two, three,
And nothing more was heard.

4
But these old bells have passed away,
Like many things besides;
And now a six bell set they play
At morn and eventide.

5
The while I write, these merry bells
Are sounding in my ear,
And sure enough the music says,
“Cheer up and never fear.”

6
But I must leave these merry bells,
Reluctant tho' I be,
And tell you of some other things
Which I was wont to see.

7
I was just now about to say
The land itself was gone,
Or rather that which did surround
The town, is all now built upon.

8
The fields, which then were fresh and green,
Are all now taken in;
And where we heard the songster's note,
You hear the factory's din.




9
The houses that composed the place,
Were very few and mean;
And very frequent mud or ditch
Among them, too were seen.

10
And some there were but doorway high,
From basement to the roof;
Yet were the floors beneath the ground, 
Of which there's ample proof

11
“T'would seem that when men did intend
Themselves a house to build, 
They minded to keep low enough,
For fear they should be kill'd.

12
The roofs were mainly thatched with straw,
As good as could be found;
And the buildings were so low,
The eaves 'most touched the ground.

13
In course of time the straw became
As black as black could be,
And then it was upon its coat
The house leek you would see.

14
This plant, old dames would often say,
Was good for scald or burn;
But it is gone, and so have they,
So 'tis no use to mourn.

15
Upon the roofs sly boys would go
Up to the chimney top;
There they would plant a flag or slate,
And thus the draught would stop.

16
And while the inmates were asleep, 
The house would fill with smioke,
Until they scarce could get their breath;
'Twas almost past a joke.




17
Some few did live in cellars deep,
To which by steps they went;
And while all quiet or asleep,
A missile oft was sent,

18
Which went bang, bang against the door,
And did their slumbers wake;
But e'er they got upon the floor
There was no one to take;

19
For by that time the rogueish boys,
Had scamper'd far away
To other parts, and there again
Their antic tricks would play.

20
And thus they did good people tease,
Through all the livelong night;
Nor dared they after go to sleep,
Being put in such a fright.

21
And many other such like things,
In mischief oft was done,
Of wanton kind, which would not bear
The light of mid-day sun.

22
But worse than all, some cocks did fight
On that most sacred day
Which God hath set apart when men
Should hear his word and pray.

23
And many did the Sabbath break,
By ranging to and fro
Along the fields; and few there were
That to God's house would go.

23A
Besides, 'twas then a frequent thing
To work as well as play,
By hanging out and drying cloth,
On that same holy day.

23B
But now such things you never see, 
Nor ever will again;
They're gone, and public decency
Will this, its right, maintain.

24
(Yet some there were, we did then find,
 In that degenerate age,
Who lov'd their God, and did delight
In showing forth his praise.)

25
Perhaps you wonder how it was
Such bad deeds could be done,
 And all the more as there were stocks
In that same little town.

26
Likewise there was a ducking stool
Placed o'er a little pond, 
To frighten folks from doing ill,
Lest they might there be drowned.

27
Since then old Time has wonders wrought,
In this our native town,
For as the buildings have increased,
The folks have wiser grown.

28
We think the two have closely run, 
As time has onward gone,
And it would puzzle us to tell
Which in this race had won.

29
We do remember well the time
When trade was very low;
Although the way of doing it
Was marvellously slow.

30
There were no mills,as now there are,
In number or in size;
The people of those bygone days
Ne'er saw such with their eyes.

31
The tumming stock, which they did use
For carding wool, we've seen;
T'was worked by hand, a simple thing,
Sans claim to a machine





32
This wool was on the distaff spun,
And only by one thread
At once; it does seem strange to us,
How they did earn their bread.

33
But this slow mode was laid aside,
Just prior to my day,
And some improvement had been made,
Tho' little, we should say.

34
For when machinery did begin
To card and spin the wool,
The engines were by horses turned;
Folks then were rather dull.

35
But by and by they wiser grew,
And other plans did try;
A mill was built, and very soon
The wheels by steam did fly.

36
But now there's fifty times the sum
Of water and steam power;
And which is now, and has been long,
Increasing every hour.

37
Should trade and commerce still go on
At this, its present rate,
Before there's many more years run,
The town then will be great.

38
The masters erst were very few,
And very poor beside;
And when they did to market go,
'Twas seldom they did ride.

39
And so they trudged it oft on foot,
The long and weary way,
Both there and back, but yet sometimes
They overnight did stay.

40
But as there are no rules without
Exception, so in this;
A person near the town did keep
A horse for general use.

41
A horse, I said, and so it was
In all respects tho'small;
It was what common people then
A galloway did call.

42
Well, this said horse he used to lend,
At eighteen pence per day;
We wonder now, that corn's so dear,
Howe'er he made it pay.

43
As time sped on, some tradesmen, too,
Themselves a horse did buy;
Whilst others who had still to walk, 
Thought they were getting high.

44
Well' after that the saddle, too,
Began to fell too warm;
They thought that horsemanship itself
Might some day do them harm.

45
They said they'd better have a gig,
In which to sit at ease;
It would be better for their health-
Believe it as you please.

46
Well now the gig does go too slow,
And we have got the rail,
By which we travel too and fro, 
By express or the mail.

47
And now to London we do ride,
In four hours time or so;
There was a time we recollect
It took near thirty-two

48
And well-a-day, there was a stir, 
When any one did go;
The place was in quite a ferment, 
There was so much to do.





49
There were but few in all the place, 
That overcoats did wear, 
And there was such a borrowing
Of them both far and near.

50
But now they've all got coats apiece, 
and wrappers too in store;
While some can order any day
Their carriage to the door.

51
Now travelling's little thought about;
You get into the train,
And while some people scarcely move,
You're there and back again.

52
But now we must return again, 
and tell you something more,
Which likely many of you know, 
And some ne'er knew before.

53
Long time we did in darkness lay,
Through long and dreary nights, 
But now it pleases us to see
The bright and shining lights.

54
Both on the roads and in the streets, 
You'll find we've got the gas,
So that you may select the way
On which you wish to pass.

55
Much opposition it did meet
From ignorance and spite;
Uttered by men whose evil deeds 
Would never bear the light.

56
But truth, which ever does prevail,
Has conquered in this case,
And all good people now do say,
'Tis well we have the gas.

57
Nor is this all, for we must speak
Of something else besides;
The Health of Town's Bill we have got-
We're making rapid strides.

58
Likewise we're having waterworks
Put down in this same place,
So that e'er long the town will show
A bright and cleanly face.

59
When all that's foul is wash'd away
From sight, as well as smaell,
We think you will agree with us,
'Tis all done very well.

60
Of water we have known the want
A long time, we are sure,
But soon we shall abundance have:
And abundance pure.

61
We then shall have no more complaints
About a short supply;
When everyone can get their fill
They'll laud it to the sky.

62
We've also built a public hall;
A noble edifice;
And were you once that hall to see,
You'd say 'twas not amiss.

63
It shows what may be achieved
By zeal and unity;
And while it is an ornament-
For use it is to be.

64
It is for children larger grown,
That they may there repair,
And search for knowledge as for gold,
And thus find treasure there.

65
And knowledge of a higher kind,
We have it pure and good;
It flows in rich and copious streams:
So full 'tis like a flood.





66
For now beside the ancient Church,
Ten Chapels we have got;
(While since we knew there was not one
Of them upon the spot.)

67
Where, as each Sabbath day returns, 
The gospel is set forth
In all its truth and faithfulness,
In all its native worth.

68
Likewise those noble Sunday Schools,
Which in the town abound;
These are the nurseries of the Church,
And such they have been found.

69
These do no great pretensions make
To outward pomp or show;
Yet ne'ertheless we do believe
Much fruit in them doth gro

70
 Then labour on, ye worthy men,
And sow the precious seed;
Not doubting that if thus you act,
That God your work will speed.

71
He will not suffer you to toil
And labour long in vain;
Soon He will send the teeming shower-
The first and latter rain.

72
Soon shall you see the early blade, 
Anon the yellow ear;
Be sure the harvest is at hand, 
The reaping time is near.

73
Moreover, we have other schools
To train the rising youth
In paths of knowledge there to walk, 
In virtue and in truth.

74
And now but one word more we say, 
Before this piece we close;
That as we have such noble things, 
We should them rightly use.

75
That each and all should do their best
To carry out the plan
Of getting and of doing good
Unto their fellow-man.

76
That when on earth our work is done, 
And each his race has run, 
May it be ours to hear the shout
“Well done,” “Well done,” “Well done.”
















 


